(DOCSP-26797): Flutter - Improve sync subscription documentation (#2382)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/sdk/flutter/sync/write-to-synced-realm.txt

.. _flutter-write-synced-realm:

==========================================
Write Data to a Synced Realm - Flutter SDK
==========================================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

When writing data to a synced realm using Flexible Sync, you can use the same APIs

> as writing to a local realm database. However, there are some differences

Author: i dont think it's necessary here.

and Realm SDK data model and subscriptions.

Device Sync is configured with the following queryable fields:

- ``_id`` (always included)
- ``miles``
- ``ownerId``

Device Sync has permissions configured to let users read and write only their own
data:

.. code-block:: json
   :emphasize-lines: 5-13

   {
     "rules": {},
     "defaultRoles": [
       {
         "name": "owner-read-write",
         "applyWhen": {},
         "read": {
           "ownerId": "%%user.id"
         },
         "write": {
           "ownerId": "%%user.id"
         }
       }
     ]
   }

The examples on this page use the following schema:

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/flutter/write_to_synced_realm_test.snippet.realm-model.dart
   :language: dart

Using that schema, the examples use the following realm and subscription query:

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/flutter/write_to_synced_realm_test.snippet.subscription-setup.dart
   :language: dart

Write to a Synced Realm
-----------------------

When you write to a synced realm, your write operations must match *both*
of the following:

- **The sync subscription query.**
    - If your write operation doesn't match

>       the query in the subscription, the write fails with a compensating write error.

Reviewer: Might we want to say instead something like: 

`the write reverts due to a non-fatal compensating write error`

    - To learn more about compensating write errors and how to avoid them,
      refer to the :ref:`Compensating Writes <flutter-compensating-writes>` section.
- **The Device Sync permissions** in your App Services App.
    - If your try to write data that doesn't match the Device Sync permissions expression,

>       the write fails with a permission denied error.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we list permission denied in the Sync errors section - should we link out to it from here if we do?

    - To learn more about configuring Device Sync permissions for your app,
      refer to :ref:`sync-rules` and the :ref:`flexible-sync-permissions-guide`
      in the App Services documentation.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/flutter/write_to_synced_realm_test.snippet.write-synced-realm.dart
   :language: dart

.. _flutter-compensating-writes:

Compensating Writes
-------------------

> Compensating write errors occur when you write data to a realm locally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compensating write errors occur when you write data to a realm 
```

that doesn't align with the realm's sync subscriptions.

Because the client realm has no concept of "illegal" writes,

> the write always initially succeeds locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the write initially succeeds until realm attempts to resolve the changeset with the App Services backend.
```

Author: ```suggestion
the write initially succeeds until realm resolves the changeset
with the App Services backend.
```

> Upon sync, the server will notice the illegal write. The server then undoes the change.

Reviewer: I think we're anthropomorphizing here. The server isn't "noticing" the illegal write. It applies the rules and permissions, determines that the user does not have authorization to perform the write, and reverts it. I think we could be a little more technical for accuracy here to improve understanding of this issue.

Author: thx i like this.

fwiw this language was lifted from the App Services compensating write docs. (if only we had a monorepo and could fix there in this PR 😅)

      refer to the :ref:`Compensating Writes <flutter-compensating-writes>` section.
- **The Device Sync permissions** in your App Services App.
    - If your try to write data that doesn't match the Device Sync permissions expression,
      the write reverts with a non-fatal permission denied error (ErrorPermissionDenied).
    - To learn more about configuring Device Sync permissions for your app,
      refer to :ref:`sync-rules` and the :ref:`flexible-sync-permissions-guide`
      in the App Services documentation.

To learn more about permission denied errors, compensating write errors
and other Device Sync error types, refer to :ref:`sync-errors` in the App Services documentation.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/flutter/write_to_synced_realm_test.snippet.write-synced-realm.dart
   :language: dart

.. _flutter-compensating-writes:

Compensating Writes
-------------------

Compensating write errors occur when you write data to a realm
that doesn't align with the realm's sync subscriptions.

Because the client realm has no concept of "illegal" writes,
the write initially succeeds until realm resolves the changeset
with the App Services backend.

> Upon sync, the server applies the rules and permissions,
> determines that the user does not have authorization to perform the write, and reverts it.

Author: ```suggestion
Upon sync, the server applies the rules and permissions, then
determines that the user does not have authorization to perform the write.
```

The revert operation, called a "compensating write", syncs back to the client

> so the client's realm no longer has the illegal write.

Author: ```suggestion
The client's realm then reverts the illegal write operation.
```

.. _flutter-write-synced-realm:

==========================================
Write Data to a Synced Realm - Flutter SDK
==========================================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

When writing data to a synced realm using Flexible Sync, you can use the same APIs
as writing to a local realm. However, there are some differences
in behavior to keep in mind as you develop your application.
To learn more about reading and writing data to a realm,
refer to :ref:`Read & Write Data <flutter-read-write-data>`.

Examples on This Page
---------------------

The examples on this page use an Atlas App Services App with the following 
Device Sync configuration and a client app with the following Realm SDK 
data model and subscriptions.

Device Sync is configured with the following queryable fields:

- ``_id`` (always included)
- ``miles``
- ``ownerId``

Device Sync has permissions configured to let users read and write only their own
data:

.. code-block:: json

>    :emphasize-lines: 5-13

Reviewer: This emphasize struck me as slightly odd because it starts with `"name": "owner-read-write"` - NOT the opening `{` above it - but the emphasize _does_ include the closing `}` below it. We should probably either omit the closing `}` or include the opening `{` for consistency.

Author: def a mistake on my part. let's just cut the emphasize. don't think it adds much here.

>    :emphasize-lines: 5-13

Author: ```suggestion
```

    - To learn more about compensating write errors and how to avoid them,
      refer to the :ref:`Compensating Writes <flutter-compensating-writes>` section.
- **The Device Sync permissions** in your App Services App.
    - If your try to write data that doesn't match the Device Sync permissions expression,
      the write reverts with a non-fatal permission denied error (ErrorPermissionDenied).
    - To learn more about configuring Device Sync permissions for your app,
      refer to :ref:`sync-rules` and the :ref:`flexible-sync-permissions-guide`
      in the App Services documentation.

To learn more about permission denied errors, compensating write errors
and other Device Sync error types, refer to :ref:`sync-errors` in the App Services documentation.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/flutter/write_to_synced_realm_test.snippet.write-synced-realm.dart
   :language: dart

.. _flutter-compensating-writes:

Compensating Writes
-------------------

Compensating write errors occur when you write data to a realm
that doesn't align with the realm's sync subscriptions.

When you write data that doesn't match a subscription, the following occurs:

> #. Because the client realm has no concept of "illegal" writes,

Reviewer: This is a lovely, clear description that I think will be quite helpful for developers to understand this behavior. I wonder if we can make it an include to put in all the SDKs?

Author: yeah that'd make sense to me. 

perhaps we can discuss during lobby?
